README.md, before:

# rvr

A ROS Python package for the Sphero RVR - used on a Raspberry Pi.

_Please note: this code is still in the middle of the development process!_

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/markusk/rvr)](https://github.com/markusk/rvr/issues) [![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/markusk/rvr)](https://github.com/markusk/rvr/stargazers) [![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/markusk/rvr)](https://github.com/markusk/rvr/blob/master/LICENSE)

---

## Step 1: Setup Raspberry Pi OS

- Install Raspberry Pi OS (fka Rasbpian) on your Raspberry Pi ([Instruction](https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads/raspberry-pi-os/)).

```bash
sudo ssh-keygen -A
```

- Start ssh:

```bash
sudo systemctl restart ssh.service
```

### Setup the Raspbery Pi serial port

```bash
sudo raspi-config
```

Choose:

- Interfacing Options
- P5 Serial
- No (No Login shell over serial port)
- Yes (Enable serial port hardware)

Do _not_ reboot now!

- Change /boot/cmdline.txt file regarding tty-entries to this (credits to [richard_mark](https://ubuntu-mate.community/t/writing-to-the-serial-port-gpio-tx-rx/4632/3)):

[...] console=tty1 [...]

```bash
sudo nano /boot/cmdline.txt
```

- Add your user to the dialout group:

```bash
sudo gpasswd --add ${USER} dialout
```

- Now reboot the Raspberry Pi!

## Step 2: Joystick/Gamepad OS support

```bash
sudo apt-get install joystick
```

### Microsoft XBOX Wireless Controller

- Supported by the Kernel - if used with the USB connector.

### Gamepad/Joystick test

- Connect a Gamepad to the Pi, start the following command and press any buttons or move some axes:

```bash
jstest --normal /dev/input/js0
```

## Step 3: ROS Noetic Setup (with Python 3 support)

- Install ROS Noetic on your Raspberry Pi ([Instruction](https://varhowto.com/install-ros-noetic-raspberry-pi-4/)):

- Install ROS packages (+++ TO BE CHECKED !!! +++):

```bash
sudo apt-get install ros-melodic-urg-node ros-melodic-teleop-twist-keyboard joystick ros-melodic-joystick-drivers ros-melodic-teleop-twist-joy
```

## Step 5: Create a central place for this repository

- Create your own development directory "develop"

```bash
mkdir ~/develop
cd ~/develop
```

- Clone this repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/markusk/rvr.git
```

- Create a catkin workspace _without_ 'src' subfolder:

```bash
mkdir ~/catkin_ws
cd ~/catkin_ws
```

- Create symbolic link with the name 'src', pointing to the 'src' folder in the ROS directory from this repository:

```bash
ln -s ~/develop/rvr/ROS/catkin_workspace/src/ src
catkin_make
```

## Step 6: Setup Sphero Public SDK

### Long version

- Setup SDK with method 2: [Instructions](https://sdk.sphero.com/docs/getting_started/raspberry_pi/raspberry_pi_setup/#using-git)

### Short version

- _Without_ [pipenv](https://github.com/pypa/pipenv):

```bash
pip3 install aiohttp pyserial_asyncio
cd ~/develop
git clone https://github.com/sphero-inc/sphero-sdk-raspberrypi-python
```

### Make the Sphero Public SDK accessible for the RVR ROS package

- Create symbolic link, pointing to the 'sphero_sdk' folder:

```bash
ln -s ~/develop/sphero-sdk-raspberrypi-python/sphero_sdk/ ~/develop/rvr/ROS/catkin_workspace/src/rvr/lib/
```

#### Turn on the RVR and test the SDK

- Start the ROS test program:

```bash
cd ~/catkin_ws/src/rvr/nodes
./test.py
```

- The output should look something like this:

```bash
Checking RVR firmware versions...
Checking CMS firmware versions...
Firmware check complete.
Battery percentage:  90 %
Voltage state:  1
Voltage states:  [unknown: 0, ok: 1, low: 2, critical: 3]
```

_Note: The firmware check seems to pop up from time to time._

## Step 7: Run ROS

### Test the RVR ROS package

- Start the ROS launch file:

```bash
cd ~/catkin_ws
roslaunch rvr test.launch
```

- The output should look like above.
- Exit the program with CTRL-C.

### The main launch file

- Run the main launch file on the robot (Raspberry Pi):

```bash
cd ~/catkin_ws
roslaunch rvr rvr.launch
```

_**to do:**_ On another computer (the ground control center):

```bash
export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://<hostname>:11311
rosparam set joy_node/dev "/dev/input/js1"
roslaunch rvr ground_control_center.launch
```

## _**to do:**_ Step 8: Setting up ROS for autostart

### systemd under Ubuntu

```bash
sudo cp raspi/etc__systemd__system__rvr-ros-start.service /etc/systemd/system/rvr-ros-start.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start rvr-ros-start.service
sudo systemctl enable rvr-ros-start.service
```

---

## The ROS launch files

### K

#### keyboard_control_test

Listens to a teleop_twist_keyboard node and prints out the data/messages. Uses:

- _teleop_twist_keyboard_
- _nodes/keyboard_listener.py_

### M

#### motor_server

Controls the motors on the robot. Uses:

- _motor_server.py_

### R

#### rvr

Controls the whole robot. To be started on the robot. Uses:

- _motor_server.py_

_**to do:**_
- _tf_broadcaster.py_
- _battery_publisher.py_
- _imu_bno055.py_
- _base_controller.py_
- _minibot_camera_
- _urg_node_

Commit message:

creating a start script for pgpiod

README.md, after:

# rvr

A ROS Python package for my rosbot - running on a Raspberry Pi.

_Please note: this code is still in the middle of the development process!_

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/markusk/rosbot)](https://github.com/markusk/rosbot/issues) [![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/markusk/rosbot)](https://github.com/markusk/rosbot/stargazers) [![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/markusk/rosbot)](https://github.com/markusk/rosbot/blob/master/LICENSE)

---

## Step 1: Setup Raspberry with Ubuntu

- Install Ubuntu Desktop ([Instruction](https://ubuntu.com/desktop/)).


### Download and install pigpio
https://abyz.me.uk/rpi/pigpio/download.html

(will be installed to /usr/local/lib and /usr/local/bin)



### clone this repository
https://github.com/markusk/rosbot

```bash
git cloe https://github.com/markusk/rosbot.git
```


Choose:

- Interfacing Options
- P5 Serial
- No (No Login shell over serial port)
- Yes (Enable serial port hardware)

Do _not_ reboot now!

- Change /boot/cmdline.txt file regarding tty-entries to this (credits to [richard_mark](https://ubuntu-mate.community/t/writing-to-the-serial-port-gpio-tx-rx/4632/3)):

[...] console=tty1 [...]

```bash
sudo nano /boot/cmdline.txt
```

- Add your user to the dialout group:

```bash
sudo gpasswd --add ${USER} dialout
```

- Now reboot the Raspberry Pi!

## Step 2: Joystick/Gamepad OS support

```bash
sudo apt-get install joystick
```

### Microsoft XBOX Wireless Controller

- Supported by the Kernel - if used with the USB connector.

### Gamepad/Joystick test

- Connect a Gamepad to the Pi, start the following command and press any buttons or move some axes:

```bash
jstest --normal /dev/input/js0
```

## Step 3: ROS Noetic Setup (with Python 3 support)

- Install ROS Noetic on your Raspberry Pi ([Instruction](https://varhowto.com/install-ros-noetic-raspberry-pi-4/)):

- Install ROS packages (+++ TO BE CHECKED !!! +++):

```bash
sudo apt-get install ros-melodic-urg-node ros-melodic-teleop-twist-keyboard joystick ros-melodic-joystick-drivers ros-melodic-teleop-twist-joy
```

## Step 5: Create a central place for this repository

- Create your own development directory "develop"

```bash
mkdir ~/develop
cd ~/develop
```

- Clone this repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/markusk/rvr.git
```

- Create a catkin workspace _without_ 'src' subfolder:

```bash
mkdir ~/catkin_ws
cd ~/catkin_ws
```

- Create symbolic link with the name 'src', pointing to the 'src' folder in the ROS directory from this repository:

```bash
ln -s ~/develop/rvr/ROS/catkin_workspace/src/ src
catkin_make
```

## Step 6: Setup Sphero Public SDK

### Long version

- Setup SDK with method 2: [Instructions](https://sdk.sphero.com/docs/getting_started/raspberry_pi/raspberry_pi_setup/#using-git)

### Short version

- _Without_ [pipenv](https://github.com/pypa/pipenv):

```bash
pip3 install aiohttp pyserial_asyncio
cd ~/develop
git clone https://github.com/sphero-inc/sphero-sdk-raspberrypi-python
```

### Make the Sphero Public SDK accessible for the RVR ROS package

- Create symbolic link, pointing to the 'sphero_sdk' folder:

```bash
ln -s ~/develop/sphero-sdk-raspberrypi-python/sphero_sdk/ ~/develop/rvr/ROS/catkin_workspace/src/rvr/lib/
```

#### Turn on the RVR and test the SDK

- Start the ROS test program:

```bash
cd ~/catkin_ws/src/rvr/nodes
./test.py
```

- The output should look something like this:

```bash
Checking RVR firmware versions...
Checking CMS firmware versions...
Firmware check complete.
Battery percentage:  90 %
Voltage state:  1
Voltage states:  [unknown: 0, ok: 1, low: 2, critical: 3]
```

_Note: The firmware check seems to pop up from time to time._

## Step 7: Run ROS

### Test the RVR ROS package

- Start the ROS launch file:

```bash
cd ~/catkin_ws
roslaunch rvr test.launch
```

- The output should look like above.
- Exit the program with CTRL-C.

### The main launch file

- Run the main launch file on the robot (Raspberry Pi):

```bash
cd ~/catkin_ws
roslaunch rvr rvr.launch
```

_**to do:**_ On another computer (the ground control center):

```bash
export ROS_MASTER_URI=http://<hostname>:11311
rosparam set joy_node/dev "/dev/input/js1"
roslaunch rvr ground_control_center.launch
```

## _**to do:**_ Step 8: Setting up ROS for autostart

### systemd under Ubuntu

```bash
sudo cp raspi/etc__systemd__system__rvr-ros-start.service /etc/systemd/system/rvr-ros-start.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start rvr-ros-start.service
sudo systemctl enable rvr-ros-start.service
```

---

## The ROS launch files

### K

#### keyboard_control_test

Listens to a teleop_twist_keyboard node and prints out the data/messages. Uses:

- _teleop_twist_keyboard_
- _nodes/keyboard_listener.py_

### M

#### motor_server

Controls the motors on the robot. Uses:

- _motor_server.py_

### R

#### rvr

Controls the whole robot. To be started on the robot. Uses:

- _motor_server.py_

_**to do:**_
- _tf_broadcaster.py_
- _battery_publisher.py_
- _imu_bno055.py_
- _base_controller.py_
- _minibot_camera_
- _urg_node_
